A window, a dawn, ... as shadows, are barely seen
Two chairs, a bookshelf on the wall.
Did I wake up? Or the ethereal lilac’s smell
I fancied in my dream?
Or this is through the grieving parting,
Through those dim and smoky clouds,
A shadow is reaching out
And smiles from afar?

Dawn and rain. A dense fog in the park,
And in the window – an unneeded candle,
An open and forgotten trunk,
Her shoulders that barely tremble.
No word about us, no word about the past.
It’s such a trifle – what happened at the end!
When solitude for two – it is so sad...
– The sun, with a slanting ray, at last,
Turned into gold the silver tress.

I know the price of my poems.
I’m sorry for them, that’s all.
But the glory of the verse of others
I experience as betrayal.
Through digressions, repetitions,
Without colours and almost without words,
One single vision,
Like the moon through the clouds.
Now it shows, now it’s gone,
Now it fogs up slightly
And sheds quiet light
And brings inevitable reconciliation
With the tongue’s helplessness.

It happens: no oblivion, no dreams,
The near shadows are roaming in the mist,
Whether you argue or you don’t, no doubts,
“Death and time are reigning on this earth”.
Death and time. Suffering – we’ll add.
...But by the morning, all of a sudden, with no cause,
With grieving happiness of existence
Something shines quietly on this earth.

One person said: «One life is not enough»
Another said, «The goal we can't handle»
A woman, habitually and dull,
Not listening, has rocked the cradle.
The fading ropes creaked so much,
Fell into silence — more gently every time! —
As if the angels sang for her from heaven
And talked about love.

The twilight turns into unbearable time,
Unbearable nights...
Where are you, my late fellows?
Where are you, my friends? It’s time to reply.
With no hesitations, towards danger,
— With no hesitations and no inanity, —
Under a fading torch of “clarity”,
My friends, like for the holiday, we will go!
Under the fading torch of “tenderness”
— Only not to grow numb before saying goodbye, —
With utter consciousness of despair,
With total willingness to die.

For centuries, God promises us bliss!
With you forever! – The answer flies.
But hope is shattered. And passion dies.
There is no happiness, eternity, or God.
But there are clouds in the sky above,
The empty rocks, the shining ice,
And still no name... to boredom and to grief…
That stays with us until the day we’ll leave.

Life! What do I need from you – I do not know.
My grief cooled down, a lot of infancy.
But longing, as much as I’m longing now,
The merciful God will not allow.
And if somewhere he exists and breathes,
The one, who finally was brought to me by fate,
Why doesn’t he come to me and doesn’t hear
The voice of mine that didn’t fade as yet?
And only my eyes, dark, misty, big,
The two enormous and mournful wings
Threw shadows from the Caucasian hills
On life of mine and on my all ordeals.

O, you, my life, enough of fuss,
Enough complaints, – it's all just void.
And peace descends into the world –
You, too, search for your rest.
I want the heavy snow to fall,
The sky, transparent blue, to stretch,
And that I could forever sense
Ice in my heart and on the trees - some frost.

Oh when will we go back to Russia? Oh, Hamlet of east, tell me when.
In fog and on foot we will travel, a blistering cold there’ll be then,
It won’t be triumphal, with horses, on foot we will go – no acclaim,
But you may be sure, I can promise, we’ll get to the end, all the same.
The hospital. When we’re in Russia… A fever it flickers from glee,
As if they were playing “Kol’ Slaven” in garden adjoining the sea,
As if through white walls were diffusing, in gloom of the frosty small hours
The light from the flickering candles in somnolent Kremlin’s frost towers.
Oh when will… A bellyful I’ve had! I’m washed out, exhausted and stripped.
Above us the tricolour’s flapping, the beggarly flag has me gripped,
And clings here the odour of ether, it’s stuffy, I’m covered with sweat.
Oh when will we go back to Russia… with snow it is blanketed yet.
It’s time to get ready. It’s daybreak. It’s time I abandoned my rest.
On eyelids two coins made of copper. And arms in a cross on the breast.

Speak to no one. Do not drink wine.
Leave home behind. Leave brother, wife.
From people depart. Your soul must come
To feel — the past is forever gone.
What's past one must unlove. Then time
Will come to lose love for the wild,
Indifferent ever more: the day after,
From week to week, year in and year out.
And gradually your hopes expire.
Darkness swallows all. A new life
You will find then, clear and reborn:
The wooden cross, the crown of thorns.

«O, my heart is torn apart
Of tenderness ... O, yes, I loved my life
Without measuring, without quenching passion,
— But by the age of thirty, I have no strength enough».
Over a poet, leaning with a smile,
Unknown surgeon then
With lancet will cut his tired chest,
Instead of heart a piece of ice he'll place.

For the word you remembered once
And then forgot forever,
For all that in the burning sunset
You looked for and you never found,
And for despair of your dreams,
And for the cold that grew inside your chest,
And for a slow-growing death
Without any hope of moving on,
And for the “rescue”, dressed in white,
And for the somber name of love
All sins will be forgiven,
And all your crimes.

Thank you for everything. For the war,
For the revolution and exile.
For the indifferent bright country
Where we now ‘drag out our existence’.
There is no sweeter destiny than to lose everything.
There is no happier fate than to become a vagabond.
And you’ve never been closer to heaven
Than here, tired of boredom
Tired of breathing,
    Without strength, without money,
        Without love,
            In Paris...

The sun’s caught cold and hides its rays,
though dawn came hours before…
How pleasant, on an autumn day,
to set off for my native shore.
I even love the slanted rain
down here — since, after all,
I’ll reach my home exactly when
the leaves begin to fall.
I’ll breathe fresh air, so full of spice,
beneath the endless blue.
I’ll stroll and think, “Cool northerners —
oh, how I pity you…”

He is a captain, and his hometown is Marseille.
He’s fond of brawling, ain’t too fond of talking.
He smokes a pipe, prefers the strongest ale,
and loves a girl from Nagasaki…
She’s got old leprous scars along her hands,
she’s covered in tattoos, and if you’re lucky,
in the evenings, you can see her dance
the jig in barrooms down in Nagasaki…
Her chest is very, very small, her skin is pale,
her lips — her lips are red as poppies…
And now, once more, the captain has set sail,
longing to see the girl from Nagasaki.
A coral necklace, scarlet as fresh blood,
a blouse of silk — its color khaki —
all this, along with fervent, fiery love,
he’ll offer to the girl from Nagasaki.
The captain has arrived, only to find
that some gent in a tailcoat, after smoking
too much hashish for far too many nights,
had stabbed and killed the girl from Nagasaki…
Her chest is very, very small, her skin is pale,
her lips — her lips are red as poppies…
And now, once more, the captain has set sail,
never again to see the girl from Nagasaki…

Before they closed him in the tomb
lost to the light of day,
five days and nights stretcht in the room
of pillars still he lay.
The people filed in an endless train
with flags borne low at rest
to see his sallowing profile again
and the medal red on his chest.
And over the earth that he’d forsaken
so fierce a frost held sway
it seemed that he had surely taken
part of our warmth away.
Five nights in Moscow no one slept
because to sleep he had gone.
Close watch the sentinel moon kept,
solemn and wan.

Inevitably, years will pass by, filing —
A long, long row.
Into one orchard city, asphalt beehive,
All cities will grow.
Beautiful roses planted on glass roof-tops
Will flourish, too.
But we — alas! — will neither see nor hear it;
Not I, nor you.
Despite all this, it’s easy to imagine
This city and
Its greenery, framed in sunlight’s brilliance,
In all men’s land. —
There’ll be a statue centered in a certain
Square’s octagon,
Constructed so the sunset’s gold spills, streaming
Onto the jacket’s bronze.
All kinds of little children go there, happy,
Mindless of care.
Glowing, they send their smiles in the rich sunset
To him who towers there.
A mother lifts her baby to the stone steps
And watching sunbeams piled
Above them utters softly, ‘This is Lenin,
My child.’

Night steps soft on paws of velvet,
Breathes a bear-like sigh.
Moms were made to sing and comfort,
Little boys-to cry.
From my boy as he lies snugly,
Fretful dreams I’ll drive.
Sleep, my sonny, sleep, my lovely
Dimpled fingers five.
High above — a gale of spangles,
Streams of moonlight spar.
High amid the bluish sparkles
Hangs a five-point star.
When my toddler’s grown and robust,
“Mom, I’m off,” he’ll say.
Round his neck a tie of scarlet
I will knot that day.
Then the years will pass as swiftly
As a drum’s brisk call,
While the snows of winter thickly
By the wayside fall.
Soon, a grey-eyed YCLer,
He will take his road,
And his brave new future shoulder
Like an easy load.
Meantime, still a helpless nestling,
Mother’s grey-eyed joy,
Sleep, my bunny, sleep, my darling.
Sleep, my little boy.
Sticking stamps on letters’ faces
In exotic climes,
He’ll send mail from distant places,
Fancy gifts sometimes.
Briefly ships will rest in harbour,
Then they’ll anchors weigh.
Boys were made to man a steamer,
Moms — to love and wait.
Years on years will march by swiftly,
Turn my hair to snow
Till my heart complains: “I’m weary,
It is time to go.”
It will then be stilled forever,
And the news will ride,
Over hill and dale and river
To my sailor’s side.
He will look so pale and harrowed
Grief his brow will crease.
Son will cry in bitter sorrow,
Mom will sleep in peace.
Meantime, things are as they should be,
Everything’s all right —
Mom is singing to her baby,
Baby’s sleeping tight.
And the first of flannel knickers
He’s to wear in life,
Hold my dimpled little fingers,
Sonny’s fingers five.

Oh, save me God from going mad,
It 's better just to die instead,
    No! I would rather drudge,
Or starve, or waste whole life in vain,
And not because I grudge my brain
    Or value it too much.
If only freedom I could keep,
Oh, how happily then I'd skip
    About in a field,
And I would sing, and I would dream,
Over the air and water skim,
    My madness be my shield.
But there 's a trouble: go mad
And they will treat you like a cad,
    And chain you up at once,
All life you'll have fool's cap to wear,
And they will tease you like a bear
    And never give a chance
To'escape from bars. And all night long
You'll listen not to th' sea waves song
    Or warbling of the birds,
But moans of fellow inmates,
And clanking chains, and squeaking gates,
    And warder's foul words.

— What’s new? “I tell you, nothing whatsoever.”
— Don’t fool with me: you’re hiding it, I know.
Oh, don’t you feel ashamed? you think you’re clever
To hide the news from me like from a foe?
Oh, tell me, brother, why? Inform me, I insist!
Don’t be so stubborn, give me just a clue...
“Oh, let me be, the only thing I know is this —
That you’re a fool, but that is nothing new.”

I’m not that lover, filled with passion, —
That youth, who left the world amazed:
Alas, my spring and summer passed now,
And didn’t leave a single trace.
Cupid, the god of youth and love and virtue!
I used to be your steadfast servant;
Oh, if I could be reborn, — I’d serve you
Even more passionate and fervent!

The crimson summer now grows pale;
Clear, bright days now soar away;
Hazy mist spreads through the vale,
As the sleeping night turns gray;
The barren cornfields lose their gold;
The lively stream has now turned cold;
The curly woods are gray and stark,
And the heavens have grown dark.
Where are you, my light, Natasha?
No one's seen you, — I lament.
Don't you want to share the passion
Of this moment with a friend?
You have not yet met with me
By the pond, or by our tree,
Though the season has turned late,
We have not yet had a date.
Winter’s cold will soon arrive
Fields will freeze with frost, so bitter.
In the smoky shack, a light,
Soon enough, will shine and glitter.
I won't see my love, — I'll rage
Like a finch, inside a cage,
And at home, depressed and dazed,
I’ll recall Natasha's grace. 

Where is our rose, friends?
Tell if ye may!
Faded the rose, friends,
The Dawn-child of Day.
Ah, do not say,
Such is life’s fleetness!
No, rather say,
I mourn thee, rose, — farewell!
Now to the lily-bell
Flit we away.

My days still linger, slow and rough,
Each moment multiplies the sadness
Within the heart of hapless love
And drives my yearning into madness.
I’m silent; I don’t dare to breathe.
I weep, my tears are my salvation.
My soul, held captive in this grief,
In tears alone finds consolation.
No longer do I care if life goes by,
Its empty ghost will lastly set me free;
The sorrow of my love is dear to me —
If I die loving, then I pray let die!

Before you, silently I sway.
I feel so anxious when you’re near me,
In vain, I cast a glance your way:
I’m sure that I will never say,
What I’m imagining so freely.

Why do you slip the haze’s capture,
O silver moon, so all alone;
Why is your dim glow’s flicker thrown
Upon my pillows’ downy rapture?
For by your gloomy presence here
You waken all my doleful dreaming,
The pointless trials of love, the teeming
Desires I’d hoped would disappear
By dint of all my reason’s scheming.
Away with you, fell recollection!
To sleep, unhappy ardour’s thought!
Oh, may I ne’er again be brought
To lie beneath your calm projection
As your mysterious, probing rays
Invade the room through heavy curtain
And palely, palely light a certain
Beloved’s form with shimmer’s plays.
What are you then, my lust’s diversion
Compared with secret joy’s delight,
The bliss of first love’s full immersion?
Can such a flame again ignite?
And why, O minutes, did you skelter
So like a carriage, swiftly drawn?
And thin the shadows’ fading welter
Before the unexpected dawn?
And why, O moon, then did you vanish
And drown as radiance filled the sky?
Why must I bid my love goodbye?
Why must the morning’s starkness banish?

Upon the fields the dark night spread.
They lay a long time fully covered,
The desert star its pale light shed
From cloudy heavens where it hovered.
And as the fire now ceased to blaze,
In misty unbelieving darkness,
Upon the heights in all their starkness
Two silent camps stood in the haze.
All slept, rebellious billows’ grumble
Was all that sounded in the night,
And from afar with thunderous might
Came ring of sword and horse hooves’ rumble.
Now horde of youthful horsemen speeds
In silence through the oaken spinneys
With shake of restless head their steeds
Impatient, exhale trembling whinnies.
And soon the horsemen rush through field,
They leave behind oaks’ fragile shelter,
Their horses to their switches yield
They’re proudly grinning as they skelter.
Their faces are with joy shot through,
Their eyes with furious fire are burning;
And soldier bard it’s only you
Who gloomy ape dark midnight’s churning
And are as pale as autumn too.
His head morosely sideways leaning,
He harbours sorrow in his breast,
Disturbed by search for sad thought’s meaning
He presses forwards on his quest.
“So what’s the matter, bard dejected?
Alone you’re sad before the strife;
No passion by your mien’s reflected,
Your reins hang loose, your sword lacks life!
Can it be true, O languor’s vassal,
You find your fields the more appeal
Than all our violent forays’ hassle
And battle-clash of sabres’ steel?
For ’neath our cutlass you were fashioned
a placid lad, pugnacious browed,
Who in the vanguard stood impassioned,
Wherever battle’s thunder sloughed.
Your victory scream once us united,
You used to sing our glory’s tale –
And now by untamed gloom you’re blighted,
Like warrior fleeing battle’s gale.”
But slowly, sad, our bard he lifted
His head and gaze till it did look
Into the distance as dusk drifted
And with a sigh his breast now shook.
“Deep sleep now falls on battle’s valley;
Alone in darkness race we free,
And I can see the end won’t dally!
The final battle summons me!
I’ll cancel cruel fate’s constriction,
I’ll draw my brothers towards the flame;
For soon upon us comes affliction,
My lonely horse will valley claim.
Oh you whose fate is to continue
To garner passion’s sweet rewards:
May passion’s tears from deep within you
Bless journey’s end with sheathèd swords!
But sure is bard’s annihilation,
For silence will demand its toll;
Elvina, in her devastation
On hearing news won’t tell a soul…
And when upon you comes salvation,
Remember then this bard, your friend,
His passion and his tragic station,
The glory of his dreadful end!”

And have you heard the singer in the night?
His song of love, his song of love despairing?
His plaintive pipe, his lonely vigil sharing?
In silent fields, before the morning light,
Have heard him there?
And have you met him in the darkling wood?
The singer from the grave, alone, despairing?
And seen his tears, the smile that none is sharing?
His silent look of sorrow understood?
Have met him there?
And when you heard the singer, did you sigh?
His song of love, his song of love despairing?
The voice of sorrow far beyond all bearing,
This youth who gazes out from empty eye?
And did you sigh?

In recent days when shade has tarried,
When silver crescent of the waste
Along the misty paths is carried,
I saw at window maiden chaste
Alone and deep in thought appearing,
Her heaving bosom wracked with fear,
Who anxiously was always peering
At darkened paths beneath hills sheer.
“I’m here!” — did hasty whisper quiver
And maiden with a trembling hand
Now opened window with a shiver…
The moon shrank back behind dark’s band.
“You lucky cad!” I uttered sadly —
What joy awaits inside for thee.
Will evening come when I can glad be,
When window’s opened just for me?”

Today your gods do not deny you
These golden nights and golden days,
And gentle, fragile ladies eye you
With an attentive fervent gaze.
Play on, sing on, while you are blessed!
Squander away the fleeting night;
Through tears, I smile at the sight
Of your light-hearted happiness.

Don’t ask me why, alone in dismal thought,
In times of mirth, I’m often filled with strife,
And why my weary stare is so distraught,
And why I don’t enjoy the dream of life;
Don’t ask me why my happiness has perished,
Why I don’t love the love that pleased me then,
No longer can I call someone my cherished —
Who once felt love will never love again;
Who once felt bliss, no more will feel its essence,
A moment’s happiness is all that we receive:
From youth, prosperity and joyful pleasance,
All that is left is apathy and grief...

“Confess to me, what’s wrong. You’re in dejection.”
— I love, my friend! - “Which lady holds you captive?”
— She does. — “Glisera? Chloe? Lila’s so attractive!”
— O, no! — “To whom do you submit your soul’s affection?”
— To her! — “You’re humble! Why all this remorse?
Why do you seem so sorrowful and grim?
And who’s to blame? Her fiancé, her dad, of course...”
— It isn’t that! — “Then what?” — For her, I can’t be him.

Listless Cytherean princess, sing
No more. Begone out of my view!
But you, great scourge of tsar and king,
Proud Muse of Freedom, where are you?
Come rip my laurels off. Bring stones
And crush this coddled lyre. Let me
Sing to the world of Liberty
And shame that scum upon the thrones.
Reveal to me the noble path
Where that exalted Gaul once strode,
When you in storied Days of Wrath
Inspired in him a dauntless Ode.
Now, flighty Fortune's favored knaves,
Tremble, O Tyrants of the Earth!
But ye: take heed now, know your worth
And rise as men, ye fallen slaves!
I cannot cast my gaze but see
A body flayed, an ankle chained,
The useless tears of Slavery,
The Law perverted and profaned.
Yea, everywhere iniquitous
Power in the fog of superstition
Ascends: Vainglory's fateful passion,
And Slavery's gruesome genius.
Heavy on every sovereign head
There lies a People's misery,
Save where the mighty Law is wed
Firmly with holy Liberty,
Where their hard shield is spread for all,
Where in a Nation's faithful hand
Among mere equals in the land
The sword can equitably fall
To smite transgression from on high
With one blow, righteously severe
In fingers uncorrupted by
Ravenous avarice or fear.
O Monarchs, ye are crowned by will
And law of Man, not Nature's hand.
Though ye above the people stand,
Eternal Law stands higher still.
But woe betide the commonweal
Where it is blithely slumbering,
Where Law itself is forced to kneel
Before the Masses, or the King.
Here is the Man: witness he bears
To his forebears’ infamous error
And in the storm of recent Terror
Laid down royal neck for theirs.
King Louis to his death ascends
In sight of hushed posterity,
His crownless, beaten head he bends:
Blood for the block of perfidy.
The Law stands mute, the People too.
And down the criminal axe-blade flies
And lo! A ghastly purple lies
Upon a Gaul enslaved anew.
You autocratic psychopath,
You and your throne do I despise!
I watch your doom, your children's death
With hateful, jubilating eyes.
Upon your forehead they descry
The People’s mark of true damnation.
Stain of the world, shame of creation,
Reproach on earth to God on high!
When on the dark Neva the star
Of midnight makes the water gleam,
When carefree eyelids near and far
Are overwhelmed with peaceful dream,
The poet, roused with intellect,
Sees the lone tyrant's statue loom
Grimly asleep amid the gloom,
The palace now a derelict,
And Clio's8 awesome call he hears
Behind those awesome walls of power.
Vivid before his sight appears
The foul Caligula's last hour.
In stars and ribbons he espies
Assassins drunk with wine and spite
Approaching, furtive in the night
With wolfish hearts and brazen eyes.
And silent stands the faithless guard,
The drawbridge downed without alarm,
The gate in dark of night unbarred
By treason’s mercenary arm.
O shame! O terror of our time!
Those Janissary beasts burst in9
And slash, the Criminal Sovereign
Is slaughtered by unholy crime.
Henceforward, Monarchs, learn ye well:
No punishment, no accolade,
No altar and no dungeon cell
Can be your steadfast barricade.
The first bowed head must be your own
Beneath Law's trusty canopy
Then Peoples' life and liberty
Forevermore shall guard your throne.

The lies of fame and love’s resolve
Have vanished now without a trace,
Our youthful passions have dissolved
As though a dream or morning haze.
Yet, still, we’re burning with desire,
And with impatience in our souls,
Beneath the yoke of strength and fire,
We hark our country’s pleading calls.
In expectation, full of ardor,
The day of freedom we await, —
Thus waits a youthful, eager lover
The moment of the promised date.
And whilst with liberty we burn,
And whilst our hearts adore ovation,
Our country needs us, — let us turn
And dedicate our soul’s elation.
My friend, believe me that with thunder,
The star of joy will rise again!
And Russia will arise from slumber,
Our names will be incised with wonder
On remnants of oppressive reign!

The charm and sweetness of his magic verse
    Will mock the envious years for centuries!
Since youth, on hearing them, for glory burns,
    The wordless sorrow comfort in them sees,
And careless joy to wistful musing turns.

I love the festive board
Where joy's the one presiding,
And freedom, my adored,
The banquet's course is guiding.
When "Drink!" half-drowns the song
That only morning throttles,
When wide-flung is the throng,
And close the jostling bottles.

The lazy artist-boor is blacking
The genius's picture with his stuff,
Without any sense a-making
His low drawing above.
But alien paints, in stride of years,
Are falling down as a dust,
The genius's masterpiece appears
With former brilliance to us.
Like this, the darkly apparitions
Are leaving off my tortured heart,
And it again revives the visions
Of virgin days I left behind.

From Aesculapius escaping,
I'm lean and shaven, but alive;
His cruel paw no more torments me,
And there is hope that I may thrive.
Now health, the light friend of Priapus,
And sleep, are entering my door,
And in my plain and crowded corner
Repose becomes my guest once more.
Then humor this poor convalescent,
You too — he longs to see again
Your face, you lawless carefree creature,
You, Pindus' lazy citizen,
True son of Freedom and of Bacchus,
Who worships Venus piously,
A masterhand at every pleasure.
From Petersburg society,
Its chilly charms, its idle bustle,
Its clacking tongues that nothing stills,
Its various and endless boredom,
I'm summoned by the fields and hills,
The shady maples in the garden,
The bank of the deserted burn,
The liberties the country offers.
Give me youf, hand. I will return
At the beginning of October:
We'll drink together once again,
And o'er our cups with friendly candor 
Discuss a dozen gentlemen —
We'll talk of fools and wicked gentry,
And those with flunkeys' souls from birth,
And sometimes of the Czar of Heaven,
And sometimes of the one on earth.

Lily, Lily! I am sighing
With despair and hopeless woe.
I am tortured, I am dying,
And my soul has lost its glow,
But my love evoked no pity:
You consider me pathetic.
Keep on laughing: you are pretty
Even when unsympathetic. 

Among the glaucous waves that kiss gold Tauris' beaches
I saw a Nereid, as dawn flushed heaven's reaches.
I barely dared to breathe, hid in the olive trees,
While the young demigoddess rose above the seas;
Her young, her swan-white breast above the waters lifting,
From her soft hair she wrung the foam in garlands
        ⁠drifting.

The heavy clouds at length are scattering.
O Star of sorrow, star of evening,
Thy ray has silvered the fast-fading plain,
The quiet gulf, the black rocks of the main.
I love thy feeble light in the far heaven,
It wakes old thoughts now unto slumber given.
Have I not seen thee rise, remembered Star,
Across the peaceful land where all things are
Dear to the heart; where poplars stand in state
Along the vale, and myrtles delicate,
And gloomy cypresses, and evermore
The south winds sing. Along the hills and shore,
Full of sweet thoughts, in dreaming idleness,
In older days my feet were wont to press.

Why feed the early signs of boredom
With sinister and dismal thought,
And wait for separation, burdened
With sorrow, lonesome and distraught?
The day of grief is close at hand!
You’ll stand, alone, out in the sun,
And try to bring back once again
These days, but they will long be gone.
Misfortunate! then, you’ll be ready
To die in exile, on the street,
If you could only see your lady,
Or hear the shuffle of her feet. 

What's friendship? The hangover's languid burn,
restless talk of being spurned,
swapping vanity, slacking
or the shame of a patron’s backing.

I have endured my desire,
I've ceased to love my fairy dreams,
And only fruit of hearty fire —
My sufferings have stayed, it seems.
And under storms of cruel kismet
My blooming spirit quickly died,
I waited for the end, I missed it.
I'm feeling loneliness inside.
So that enveloped by the blow
Of cold wind and stormy flaws
A leaf which is belated, sole,
Vibrates on bare branch in pause...

In the days of my youth she was fond of me,
And the seven-stemmed flute she handed me.
To me with smile she listened; and already gently
Along the openings echoing of the woods
Was playing I with fingers tender:
Both hymns solemn, god-inspired
And peaceful song of Phrygian shepherd.
From morn till night in oak's dumb shadow
To the strange maid's teaching intent I listened;
And with sparing reward me gladdening
Tossing back her curls from her forehead dear,
From my hands the flute herself she took.
Now filled the wood was with breath divine
And the heart with holy enchantment filled.

Don’t covet goods of other beings —
My Goodness, You’ve commanded so;
The limits of my will You know —
Am I to manage tender feelings?
I wish not to offend my friend.
His village I do not desire,
And for his steer I don’t aspire,
I’m gazing at it all, content:
His men, his house and his cattle, —
I do not wish them to be mine.
Supposing, though, his concubine
Is beautiful... I’ve lost the battle!
And if by chance his lady’s pretty
And gifted with an angel’s skin
Then God forgive me for my sin
Of being envious and greedy!
Who can command a heart like this?
Who is a slave to worthless trial?
Not love a loved one in denial?! —
Who can resist this heaven’s bliss?
I sigh from sadness and perceive,
But I must honor my conviction,
Scared to fulfill my heart’s ambition,
I’m silent... and alone I grieve.

This time’s the final time, my friend,
I enter through your door.
Love’s quiet hour has been spent
And now, there is no more.
Don’t wait for me all night and mope,
Held captive by the deceitful hope,
Don’t burn your candles, in a daze,
Til morning rays.

I will be silenced soon!.. If on the tragic day,
The strings would pensively begin to play;
If adolescents, sitting quietly, immersed,
Began to marvel at my passion’s madness;
If only you, surrendering to sadness,
In silence mumbled melancholy verse
And loved the way my ardent heart had flamed...
If I’m still loved... allow me, my dear friend,
To re-awake the lyre with my hand
And make it ring out with my lover’s name!..
The day I find eternal rest, you’ll pause
Over my grave and say with trepidation:
“I used to loved him, and with that I caused
His songs and love, — his final inspiration. 

My friend, I have forgotten all that’s passed,
The passion of my youth was rather brief.
Don’t ask about the things that didn’t last,
Or how I felt in the times of joy or grief,
Or what I loved, on how I was betrayed.
I may not know true happiness today:
But you are innocent, conceived for only bliss,
Believe in it and seize each moment’s portion
Your soul was made for friendship and devotion,
        To feel the passion of a kiss.
Your soul is pure and unexposed to sadness
Your conscience is still clear like light of day,
Why listen to the lunacy and madness
        Of all of my uninteresting hearsay?
It will replace your peaceful thoughts with stress,
Your heart will tremble, you will cry in bed,
Your soul will lose its trust in its distress,
Perhaps, my love will fill you with regret.
Who knows? perhaps forever... No, my dear,
I fear to cast my final happiness away
Don’t ask for dangerous confessions here,
Today I love, I’m happy for today.

The dungeon I’m locked in is dingy and stale.
An eagle who’s handraised to feed by the jail,
My mate beats his wing in a wistful appeal
And pecks ‘neath my window his blood-spattered meal.
He pecks it and flings and looks up from the ground
As if he and I had the same figured out.
He calls me away with a glance and a scream,
And wishes to utter, “Let’s fly! We’re a team.
We’re free birds, my brother! Time… time we took flight
Where over the clouds there’s a mountain in white,
Where sea worlds are blue ‘neath a welcoming sky,
Where only the wind can let loose…so can I!..”

As freedom's sower in the wasteland
Before the morning star I went;
From hand immaculate and chastened
Into the grooves of prisonment
Flinging the vital seed I wandered —
But it was time and toiling squandered,
Benevolent designs misspent...
Graze on, graze on, submissive nation!
You will not wake to honor's call.
Why offer herds their liberation?
For them are shears or slaughter-stall,
Their heritage each generation
The yoke with jingles, and the gall.

Farewell, free element, o Sea!
For one last time I watch your tide
Roll azure waves in front of me
And shine in beauty full of pride.
Like farewell mutter of a friend
Deserted for a colder clime,
The sad, inviting call you send
Resounds to me for one last time.
Beloved region of my soul!
How often, next to your shoreline,
Mute and beclouded I would stroll,
Borne with my ultimate design!
How much I loved your deep replies,
Your chasm's voice, your splashes' chime,
And silence at the evening time,
And gusts of fanciful surprise!
Tradesmen or fishers' humble boat
Glides bravely, guarded by your will,
Amid the waves, for days afloat;
But you turn rough, impregnable —
And schools of ships go down your throat.
I never got to say goodnight
To this unmoving, boring shore,
Greet you with surges of delight
And level my poetic flight
Along your crests forevermore.
You called, you waited... but the chain
And mighty passion held me bound;
My soul went out to you in vain;
Still, I remained upon the ground.
What to regret? Where, in distress,
Would I now set my path and goal?
One object in your wilderness
Could still affect my frigid soul.
One lofty crag, a glorious tomb...
There stately memories dwelled on
And plunged in sleep of cold and gloom:
There faded great Napoleon.
Amid great pangs he rested there.
And like a thunder afterwards,
Another genius left us bare,
Another master of our hearts.
He fled, bewailed by liberty,
Bequeathing to the world his palms.
Grow agitated, roar, o sea:
Of you, of you he sang his psalms.
Your image was designed on him,
In spirit he was made the same:
Like you, dynamic, deep and grim.
Like you, impossible to tame.
The world grew empty... Ocean, where,
What shore now would you cast me at?
Same all around the earthly share:
Where falls a drop of welfare, there
Guards preaching or an autocrat.
Farewell then, Sea! I won't forget
Your beauty full of solemn power;
Long, long will I be hearing yet
Your rumble at an evening hour.
To silent wilderness, to groves
I'll carry over, filled with you,
Your crags and waves, your bays and coves,
And shine, and shade, and murmuring blue.

A monument I've raised not built with hands,
And common folk shall keep the path well trodden
To where it unsubdued and towering stands
        Higher than Alexander's Column.
I shall not wholly die-for in my sacred lyre
My spirit shall outlive my dust's corruption —
And honour shall I have, so long the glorious fire
        Of poesy flames on one single scutcheon.
Rumour of me shall then my whole vast country fill,
In every tongue she owns my name she'll speak.
Proud Slave's posterity, Finn, and-unlettered still —
        The Tungus, and the steppe-loving Kalmyk.
And long the people yet will honour me
Because my lyre was tuned to loving-kindness
And, in a cruel Age, I sang of Liberty
        And mercy begged of Justice in her blindness.
Indifferent alike to praise or blame
Give heed, O Muse, but to the voice Divine
Fearing not injury, nor seeking fame,
        Nor casting pearls to swine.

A friend of my severe days,
Decrepit darling dove of mine!
In deep pine woods alone you wait
For me, you wait too long a time.
In your front room under the window
You grieve as if you sentry stand,
And needles linger every minute
In your fatigued and puckered hands.
You look through old forgotten gates
At a pitch-black and distant path:
Depression, premonitions, cares
Oppress incessantly your heart.
It seems to you…

He flaunts by a lot of bright rings on his hand —
The symbols of girls’ hearts subdued by his brand.
There the diamond exults, and the opal there dreams,
And crimson of the ruby so whimsically gleams.
Yet on the insipid hand there is no my ring,
To no one ever I will give out the thing.
It was forged by the golden beam of the moon, —
While putting it on, he pronouced with a boon:
“Let you keep safe this gift, proud be of the dream!”
I will never betray the will of the beam.

And cursing each other with brute
Passion, white-hot all through,
Neither one of us understood
How small the earth was for two,
That memory torments with spite,
Afflicting the most strong-hearted,
That one learns to plead in the night:
Where has my friend departed?
And as the choir voices rise,
Happy and menacing, that instant,
The same two stern and certain eyes
Survey the soul, persistent. 

Either I remained with you,
Or you came with me, my angel!
But our fears did not come true,
We avoided separation.
It’s not your sigh of deep despair,
Or your complex accusations,
But your clear and peaceful stare
That fills my soul with trepidation.

I am praying to the window light —
It is thin, straight and white.
I have been silent today since morning,
And my heart — it is broken.
On my washstand
Some copper has turned green,
But the light plays on it,
Making it cheerful to see.
So innocent and simple in the still night
But in this empty shrine
It is like a golden holiday
And a comfort to me.

My night — I think of you obsessively,
My day — indifferent: let it be!
I turned and smiled at my destiny
That brought me only misery.
The fumes of yesterday are dire,
The flames that burn me will not die,
It seems to me, this blazing fire
Will not become a sunlit sky.
Shall I endure without conceding,
And curse you for not being there?..
You’re far away. You’ll never see me
Imprisoned in my awful snare.

Now the pillow’s
Hot on both sides.
A second candle
Dies, the ravens cry
Endlessly.
No sleep all night,
Too late to think of sleep...
How unbearably white
The blind’s white deep.
        Hello, Morning!

The same voice and gaze aglow,
That same flaxen hair.
As it was a year ago.
Light-rays streaming through the air
Colors on white walls bestow…
Fragrances of lilies flow
And the simple words you share.

I didn’t lock the door
And candles weren’t lit,
Exhausted, sleepy, sore, —
I wouldn’t sleep a bit.
I’d watch lights dying down,
And gloomy evening firs,
And get drunk on the sounds
A voice, so much like yours.
My loss - a heavy burden
And life is agony!
I used to be so certain
That you’d return to me.

I hear caterwauling somewhere,
Distant footfalls echo in the night.
A fine lullaby to me you left!
The third month, this, since last I slept.
You're with me once again, insomnia,
Your iron face closer than anything;
Beauty, lawless beauty that you are,
Really, don't you like the way I sing?
Windows draped in white, diffuse
twilight with a spreading haze of blue...
Are we consoled by news from far away?
And why am I so light of heart with you?

I was so praying: “Quench, Oh Lord,
My deepened thirst of the song-singing!”
But for the worldly in the world
There’s no a chance of any freeing.
Like altar’s smoke that couldn’t flee
Up to the famous throne Father’s —
But only floats by the feet,
Kissing worshipfully the grasses, —
Such I kiss grounds yours, Oh God!
Will ever touch the Heavens’ fire
The lashes of my eyes, strong-closed,
And this strange dumbness, to admire?

Breast so helpless succumbing to chilling,
But with feather-tread airy I paced.
Struggling, frozen left mitten contriving
On right-hand digits to place.
Many journeying paces it seeming —
Yet I knew there were only three!
Midst autumnal-leaved maples, whispering —
It besought me, “Perish with me!
Straying wanderer deceived by snarling
Fickle wicked faith-spending doom.”
Answered I, “O my darling, darling!
You and I’ll go to the tomb…”
Here’s a song of the final meeting.
Cast I glance on dark house’s frame;
Saw the distant and yellow flickering
Candles’ dimly guttering flame.

Three times she tortured me like this.
I awoke with an anguished moan
And saw her thin pale hands
And mouth, scathing and black.
“Who were you kissing at dawn,
As you swore that you’d die if it ends,
And hiding your burning bliss,
Sobbed by the gate near the shack?
You walked him to death’s abyss,
He will die soon, and never come back.”
A falcon’s cry that rang so tensely,
That voice was strangely like another.
My body was wringing in pain,
With a chill that comes as you die.
And the spider web, woven so densely,
Fell down on the bed like a cover…
Oh, you weren’t laughing in vain,
My unforgiven merciless lie!

As a silver, delicate strand
Is woven in my dark tresses —
Only you, silent nightingale,
Can understand this torment.
Your sensitive ear hears distance,
In the willow’s thin branches,
Ruffled, you gaze — without breathing —
If a strange song sounds.
But a moment ago, a moment,
The poplars suddenly stilled,
And your ineffable joy,
Rang out, your poisonous song.

A boy said to me: «How painful it is!»
And it’s a great pity with him.
Just a short while ago he was content,
Having only heard about sorrow.
And now he knows all of it, no less
Than you, wise and old, do.
Dimmed and, it seems, already became
So the pupils of blinding eyes.
I know: he won’t cope with his pain,
With first love’s bitter pain,
How helplessly, greedily and torridly
My cold hands are caressing.

Instead of wisdom — experience was
My fresh, non-quenching glass.
My youth was Sunday prayer’s words…
Could I forget my past?
How many deserted roads were trod
With him, who wasn’t dear,
How many times did I bow to God,
For him, who was sincere…
I have become forgetful, whiling
Time away, with no concern.
Those lips unkissed and eyes unsmiling
Will never again return.

You won’t hear from him any longer,
No more letters to save.
In the fire-embraced, doleful Poland,
You won’t find his grave.
Let your soul grow calm and composed,
No more loss in this war:
He’s a warrior now in God’s host,
Don’t despair anymore.
Know, it’s sinful to mourn him today,
In the comfort of home,
He’s a patron to whom you can pray,
And he’s one of your own.

I concealed all my worry inside me,
And gazed casually, calm and composed.
She sat down, like a porcelain idol,
In a long predetermined pose.
It’s my daily routine to be merry
But attentiveness takes all my might…
Or did indolence now overwhelm me
After so many scented March nights?
These tiresome talks and debates,
Lifeless chandelier’s yellowish daze,
And the flicker of elegant plates
Near the graceful hand, slightly raised.
She has caught my companion’s stare,
And he smiles, with hope, full of thrill…
O, my blissful, prosperous heir,
Please be sure to read over my will. 

How can You view the Neva like that,
How dare You scale the bridges just so?
People think I’m remarkably sad
Since your vision could not let me go.
Razor sharp wings of black angels flew,
Judgement Day is approaching soon,
And bonfires of raspberry hue,
In the snow like roses bloom.

Night. Streetlamp. Street. The chemist's store.
A world in dingy, sleazy light.
Survive a quarter century more,
Nothing will change. Can't leave tonight.
You'll die- and start the whole thing over.
The same old story will repeat:
Night. Icy rippling of the river.
Streetlamp. The chemist's store. The street.

Oh no! You cannot disenchant my heart
With flatter, beauty, or appreciation.
I'll be a stranger, someone far apart,
A ghost, devoid of life, in your imagination.
You'll go away. And you will kiss devoutly
A snow-white shroud, and by candle lights
You'll dream and fancy burying someone sadly
And standing at the head three days and nights.
Content with the amazing dreamy hours
You will reproach your life in the extreme.
And you will decorate with tender flowers
The burial hill you fancied in your dream.
And suddenly you'll see my shade appear
Before you on the ninth and fortieth day:
Unrecognized, uncomely, plain and drear,
The kind of shade you looked for, by the way!
With time your grieves and sorrows will fade out,
And you will humbly want to start another life
With dreams and tales you cannot do without...
For simple beauty you will wish and strive.
He will turn up, well-known, long awaited,
To wake you up from the unearthly rest.
And spring, the last one, so anticipated,
Will take you to another world, so blessed
And I will die, forgotten by you, darling,
The day your new companion comes to stay,
The moment you decide to tell him, smiling,
That all your pains and troubles are away.
You will forget my name and burial mound...
But then — you will wake up and see it's dark.
Caressing him, you'll suddenly come round,
Remember me and ask me to come back!
Devoutly, you'll stretch your hands, my dear,
At night, so desolate, my poor heart of gold!
Alas, the sounds of life don't reach the ear
Of those consoled by the unknown world.
You will condemn, afflicted and austere,
Your life that left no chance to love for you!
But in my verse you"ll find the answer, dear:
Its hidden warmth will help you live anew.

It’s dark, despite the moon above.
For many, life may turn out better, —
Inside my soul, the spring of love
Will not replace the stormy weather.
The night’s spread out in the street,
And to my spirit’s muted stare,
That’s soaked in poison, hot and sweet,
It answers with a deathly glare.
I try to keep my passions down,
Out in the cold and dawning mist,
I wander, lost among the crowd,
Engrossed, with thoughts of only this:
It’s dark, despite the moon above.
For many, life may turn out better, —
Inside my soul, the spring of love
Will not replace the stormy weather.

I haven't lived so long as you...
I've sung while you've been down and out.
A spirit came out of the blue
To show the sea of ample sound...
Your soul is chained stirred by the blast
Of storm and whirlwind wailing there,
While mine is free, as fine as dust,
That blows around in the air.
My friend, I've felt since long ago
I'll be impaired by my portion...
My heart is berried, and I know
It won"t be ever set in motion!
When we get tired and cease to be,
When in the haze we disappear
Do come to have a rest with me,
And I will come to see you, dear!

Let the dawn keep shining out,
Let the warbler sing at night,
How I wish I was allowed
To embrace and hold you tight!
Our boat will float with blessing
In the canes with rustling leaves,
You will cling to me, caressing,
Heated passion on your lips.
Sing, my love, and let the air
Flow with the amazing song,
You're more beautiful and fair
Than the bird that sings along.

On waters, spread without end,
Dressed with the sunset so purple,
It sings and prophesies for land,
Unable to lift the smashed wings' couple...
The charge of Tartars' hordes it claims,
And bloody set of executions,
Earthquake, and hunger and the flames,
The death of justice, crime’s intrusion...
And caught with fear, cold and smooth,
The fair face flames as one of lovers’,
But sound with prophetic truth
The lips that the bloody foam covers!..

The house next door has yellow windows.
Every night — every night
The wistful bolts begin to squeak,
Men walk slowly to the gate.
The heavy gates are double-locked,
And on the wall — on the wall
Someone silent, someone black
Sits motionless and counts them all.
His voice of brass calls to the men
Assembled down below
To bend their tortured backs again
To bend them low.
Inside they will disperse as ordered,
Each loaded with a heavy bag.
Behind the yellow windows laughter,
Because those beggars have been had.

A Demon, soul of all the banished,
sadly above the sinful world
floated, and thoughts of days now vanished
before him crowdingly unfurled;
days when, in glory’s habitation,
he shone out a pure cherubim,
when comets dying on their station
rejoiced to exchange a salutation
of welcome and of love with him,
when through the vapours of creation,
hungry for knowledge, he flew on
with caravans in their migration
to space where headlong stars have gone;
with love and faith to lean upon,
happy first-born of our condition,
he knew no evil, no suspicion,
his mind undaunted by the length
of fruitless aeons sadly falling...
so much, so much there was... the strength,
the will now fails him for recalling!
He wandered, now long-since outcast;
his desert had no refuge in it:
and one by one the ages passed,
as minute follows after minute,
each one monotonously dull.
The world he ruled was void and null;
the ill he sowed in his existence
brought no delight. His technique scored,
he found no traces of resistance —
yet evil left him deeply bored.

A poet's dead — entrapped by honour,
Felled by slanderous rumours spread —
A bullet in the breast, with vengeful anger,
He bowed at last his noble head.
His soul could not endure the legions
Of trifling insults and their shame,
He stood against the world's opinions,
Alone, as always — and was slain!
Yes, slain!.. And wherefore now the crying,
The praising choir's empty shout
And wretched babble's justifying —
Fate's sentence has been carried out!
Was it not you who long conspired
To mock his gift so free and bold
And, just for fun, to fan the fire
Whose embers were now growing cold?
So now, you're laughing?!.. This last anguish
The poet simply could not bear.
His genius, like a torch, extinguished,
His laurel wreath — beyond repair!..
Aloof and poised his killer boldly
Takes aim — and no escape is near:
His empty heart beats calmly, coldly,
No trembling of the pistol here.
And why the awe?.. Like countless legions
Of fugitives seeking fun and fame,
From some far distant place he came
By quirk of fate into our regions,
Deriding, mocking with disdain
This land, its language and its story;
He had no mercy for our glory,
And, at that point of time so gory,
No thought of what it was he'd slain!

Tell, uncle, it was not a boon
By fire Moscow burnt so soon
Enjoyed by Frenchmen tall?
Fierce fights... or wasn't there any?
There were, great battles, there were many,
For reason Russians, kids and granny,
This glorious day recall!
Once was a folk that you could face 
So much unlike the present race
Top gun - you're not so good!
Bad fate they had on their shields
Just few made their way from fields
But for God's will, unless He dealed,
Old Moscow would have stood!
For long in silence we withdrew 
Annoyed, awaiting battles true,
Vets grumbling off their beds:
"For winter quarters who does care?
Do not our top commanders dare
To rip unwelcome strangers' wear
With Russian bayonets?"
And here was found a true big field:
To go wild, to move unsealed!
Redoubts were built and more.
Alerted we pricked up our ears!
Had scarcely morn dropped light on spears,
Wood dark-blue tops. Somebody nears...
A Frenchmen squad's next door.

At times like a frolicsome tomboy,
At times like a butterfly gay,
In words unaffected and simple
The homeliest greeting to say.
Impulsive your manner of pleasing,
And habits you break as a snare;
You are swift as a snake in the grass,
And swift as a bird in the air.
Your innocent nature in secret,
Both gladness and sorrow denies:
As dark as the depths of the ocean
Your soul; there’s clear sky, in your eyes.
The truth for a moment, you fashion,
Then feigning and falsehood you use!
’Tis hard, I am sure, to know you;
It is harder my love to refuse.

I love my homeland, but in the strangest way;
My intellect could never conquer it.
The fame, earned with my blood and pain,
The peace, full of the proud fit,
The dark old age and its devoted tales
Won't stir in me the blithe inspiring gales.
But I do love, what for I do not know,
Its cold terrains' perpetuating quiet,
Its endless woodlands’ oscillation tired
The sea-like rivers' wild overflows.
Along the rural paths I favor taking rides,
And with a slow glance impaling morbid darks,
The trembling village lights discover on the side,
While thinking where this time for board I will park.
I like the smoke from garnered fields,
The sledges sleeping in the steppe,
The birches growing on the hill
That occupies the grassland gap.
With joy, that people fathom not,
I feel the rush of threshing scenes,
The covered with foliage huts,
The ornamented window screens.
And on the evening of the fete
I like to watch till the midnight
The dance with tapping and a chat
Of drunken fellows on the side.

I’ve raised a statue to myself that’s some!
To shameful century’s its back to run.
To its lost love that’s turned with stony face.
Like cycle wheel is bent its stony chest.
And buttocks is to sea of half-truth faced.
And if I would with nice landscape well dressed,
Whatever I would forced be to excuse, —
I would not change my image, one day choosed.
To me its height and posture pleasant are.
Thereto a tiredness has raised me high.
You, Muse, do not me blame for doing that.
My intellect now is like a sieves’ set,
And not a vessel that by gods is poured.
Let overthrow me and I’ll be bulldozed,
Let people me of willfulness accuse,
Let they destroy me and my parts confuse, —
In a big country for a children’s joy
From plaster bust, that’s earlier destroyed,
Through these weak sighted and white color’s eyes
Will I strike with a water’ stream the sky.

Don’t leave the room, don’t blunder, do not go on.
If you’re smoking Shipka, what good is the Sun?
Outside, all is meaningless, especially – the cry of joy.
To the lavatory and back straightaway, old boy.
O, don’t leave the room, don’t call for a cab, my friend.
Because Space is a corridor that will end
with a meter. And, if your dear, delight expressing,
walks inside, kick her out without undressing.
Don’t leave the room; pretend that you have a cold.
Four walls and a chair entice like nothing else in the world.
Why leave the place that you’ll surely return to late in
the night, as you were, only more – mutilated?
O, don’t leave the room. Enchanted, dance bossa nova
in shoes worn on bare feet, in a coat draped over
your naked body. The hall reeks of ski wax and cabbage.
You’ve written a lot; more would be extra baggage.
Don’t leave the room. Let only the room imagine a little
what you might look like. And besides, incognito
ergo sum, as form itself learned from substance once.
Don’t leave the room! Outside, you will not find France.
Don’t be a fool! Be what others weren’t. Remain.
Don’t leave the room! Let the furniture have free reign,
blend in with wallpaper. Bolt the door, barricade in place
with a dresser from chronos, cosmos, eros, virus, race.

Neither country and cemetery
I don’t want to choose.
Surely, I will never refuse
From the death, where was my life’s entry.
Your facade dark-blue
I’ll not find in the blackness
And instantly fall on asphalt in a dew
Between faded lines. Irresistible slackness.
And my soul, going into the dark,
Will flash over the bridges
In Petersburg’s fume as a lark.
April’s drizzle, under the nape — snowing ridges.
And I will hear the far voice:
Goodbye, my dear friend, without noise.
And I’ll see two lives
So far behind the river,
Pressing one’s cheek of forgives
To indifferent motherland with a shiver.
How girls-sisters
From unlived years unresisters,
Running out to the island,
Wave a hand to the boy in the highland.

For the blasting valor of the coming age,
For the humans - the highest tribe —
I've lost my cup at the feast of the fathers, my page
My honor, my pride.
A wolfhound century rushes at me,
But I'm not a wolf by my blood and no shields.
Better stuff me, cram me — like a hat in the sleeve —
Into the hot fur coat of Siberian wealds.
So that I'll never see
  cowards, a flimsy dirt
    or bloodshed in the wheel
Let the blue foxes shine the whole night for me
In their primeval beauty — God's will.
Will you take me where the Yenisei flows in the night?
And the pine tree reaches the star,
For I'm not a wolf by my blood
And an equal will kill me — God's right.

Preserve my words forever for their aftertaste of misfortune and smoke,
for their tar of collective patience and conscientious work —
water in the wells of Novgorod must be black and sweetened
to reflect a star with seven fins at Christmas.
Oh my Fatherland, my friend, my rough helper,
remember your unrecognized brother, the apostate from the people’s family —
I have promised to build you forests of log wells,
such as the Tartars built to lower the princes in wooden buckets.
If only your executioners, those frozen blocks, could love me,
as the Tsar Peter, a deadly marksman, loved the balls he bowled on the lawn —
for your love. I’ll walk through life in an iron shirt,
for my execution, I’ll walk the woods like Peter, and find a handle for the axe.

Our senses grew numb in this country of fear;
At ten paces they can’t our talk overhear.
But if we start a chat on occasion,
Each would speak of the Kremlin Caucasian.
Fat as maggots, his thick fingers wriggle and crawl,
Sure as stone weights, his ponderous sentences fall;
His moustache of a cockroach is grinning,
And his well-polished boot-tops are beaming.
Fawning “leaders” surround him: some go — others come,
As he plays with this hideous, half-human scum.
Someone hoots, someone howls, someone hisses,
But his goad driving them never misses.
His pernicious decrees tosses he low and high —
Like horseshoes — in the groin, in the ear, in the eye.
This broad-chested Ossetian is willing
To derive sweetest pleasures from killing.

More delicate than delicacy
Your face,
Whiter than purity
Your hand;
Living as distantly
From the world as you can
And everything about you
As it must be.
It must all be like this:
Your sorrow
And your touch
Never cooling,
And the quiet catch
Of not complaining
In the things you say,
And your eyes
Looking far away.

Let the names of flowery cities
Caress the ear with fleeting glory —
It is not Rome the city that’s immortal,
But man’s presence in the universe.
Kings try to get man in their power,
Priests find excuses for their wars,
And yet without him hearths and altars
Like wretched rubble are beneath contempt.

Yes, you remember,
You certainly remember
The way I listened
Standing at the wall
As you walked to and fro about the chamber
Reproving me
With bitter words and all.
You said
That it was time we'd parted,
And that my reckless life,
For you, was an ordeal,
And it was time a new life you had started
While I was fated
To go rolling downhill.
My love!
You didn't care for me, no doubt.
You weren't aware of the fact that I
Was like a ruined horse, amidst the crowd,
Spurred by a dashing rider, flashing by.
You didn't know
That I was all a-smoke,
And in my life, turned wholly upside-down,
I was in misery, downhearted, broke,
Because I didn't see which way we were bound.
When face to face
We cannot see the face.
We should step back for better observation.
For when the ocean boils and wails
The ship is in a sorry situation.
The world is but a ship!
But all at once,
Someone, in search of better life and glory,
Has turned it, gracefully, taking his chance,
Into the hub of storm and flurry.
Well, which of us
On board a mighty boat
Has never brawled nor barfed nor fallen down?
There are not many of them that will not
Despair when they're about to drown.
Me, too,
To loud hue and cry,
But knowing well what I was doing
Went down to the hold where I
Might keep away from scenes of spewing.
"Hold" was a Russian pub
Where I
Drank, listening to the loud bicker,
I tried to stop my worries by
Just drowning myself in liquor.
My love!
I worried you, oh my!
Your tired eyes revealed dejection,
I didn't hide from you that I
Had spent my life in altercation.
You didn't know
That I was all a-smoke,
And in my life, turned wholly upside-down,
I was in misery, downhearted, broke,
Because I didn't see
Which way we were bound.

Azure space is aflame up above,
I've forgotten my home destination...
For the first time I'm singing of love,
For the first time I give up contention.
I was all like a desolate grove
Loving women and heavily drinking.
I don"t drink any more and don't love
Like I did, living fast and unthinking.
All I want is to look at the vast
Of your gold-brown eyes, and, — oh, bother! —
How I wish that, disliking your past,
You would not like to go to another!
Gentle step, graceful waist that you have!
Oh if only you wer' able to tumble
How a bully can really love,
And how he can be timid and humble!
All those pubs I would never attend,
And my poems would all be forgotten,
If you let me take hold of your hand
And your hair, the colour of autumn.
I would follow you ever, my dove,
Be it distant or close destination...
For the first time I'm singing of love,
For the first time I give up contention.

Shagane, dear my, Shagane!
It’s because I’m from North, isn’t it,
I am ready to tell you a field,
Wavy rye, when the Moon shining there.
Shagane, dear my, Shagane.
It’s because I’m from North, isn’t it,
Where the Moon has enormous size,
And despite all the charm of Shiraz,
Ryazan spaces are better a bit.
It’s because I’m from North, isn’t it.
I am ready to tell you a field,
Curly hair I got from a rye,
If you like, reel on finger in round -
There is no pain I actually feel.
I am ready to tell you a field.
Wavy rye, when the Moon shining there,
See in waves of my hair. Oh darling,
Just make jokes, be so funny and smiling,
That I wouldn’t remember again
Wavy rye, when the Moon shining there.
Shagane, dear my, Shagane!
Far away on the North is a girl,
She is similar to you with all,
And I wonder if she thinks of me…
Shagane, dear my, Shagane.

Don’t, silly heart, get excited!
Happiness tricks every one of us,
Only the poor beg for some of it...
Don’t, silly heart, get excited.
Smoothly the moon’s yellow charms
Flood over flowering chestnuts.
Bending to Lala’s shalwars,
Under her veil I shall shelter.
Don’t, silly heart, get excited.
Sometimes we all act like children,
By turns we’re laughing and wailing:
It has been our lot to witness
Joyful success, dismal failure.
Don’t, silly heart, get excited.
I’ve been to many a country,
Everywhere joy I was seeking.
Now I’ll no longer go hunting
Happiness that has no equal.
Don’t, silly heart, get excited.
Life has not wholly deceived me.
New strength for singing I’ll summon.
Why don’t you fall fast asleep here,
Heart, in the lap of our loved one?
Life has not wholly deceived me.
Fate that descends like an avalanche
Maybe shall notice us also,
To my love I’ll get an answer
With a sweet nightingale warble.
Don’t, silly heart, get excited.

My friend, I'm really just sorry
about who, in secret blindness,
passing all length of the green alley,
just can not notice on leaves
the striking network of the streaks
and points of the tubercles
or even the serrated tracks
from saws of the blue-horned slugs.

Listen,
if stars are lit,
it means there is someone who needs it.
It means that someone wants them to be,
that someone deems those speckles of spit
                      magnificent.
And overwrought,
in the swirls of afternoon dust,
he bursts in on God,
afraid he might be already late.
In tears,
he kisses God's sinewy hand
and begs him to guarantee
that there will definitely a star.
He swears
he won't be able to stand
                      the starless ordeal.
Later,
he wanders around, worried,
but outwardly calm.
And to someone else, he says:
"Now,
it's all right.
You are no longer afraid,
are you?"
Listen,
if stars are lit,
it means there is someone who needs it.
It means it is essential
that every evening
at least one star should ascend
over the crest of the building.

Just now I smeared the map of the daily grind,
splashing paint out of a glass;
I revealed the sharp cheek-bones of the ocean
on a platter of jellied meat.
I read the summons of new lips
on the scales of a tin fish.
And you
could you
play a nocturne
on a drain-pipe flute?